[doc] High frequency telemetry support of MIXED tam tel type mode HLD (#2379)
Azure/SONiC: doc/high-frequency-telemetry/high-frequency-telemetry-mixed-mode-hld.md

## 3. Definitions/Abbreviations

The base HLD's abbreviations apply. Additional terms used in this document:

| Abbreviation | Description                                                                                              |
| ------------ | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| SINGLE_TYPE  | `SAI_TAM_TEL_TYPE_MODE_SINGLE_TYPE`: one `sai_tam_tel_type` object binds counters of exactly one type.   |
| MIXED_TYPE   | `SAI_TAM_TEL_TYPE_MODE_MIXED_TYPE`: one `sai_tam_tel_type` object binds counters of multiple types.      |
| HFT          | High frequency telemetry.                                                                                |

## 4. Overview

> The current SONiC HFT implementation hardcodes `SAI_TAM_TEL_TYPE_ATTR_MODE = SAI_TAM_TEL_TYPE_MODE_SINGLE_TYPE` when creating `sai_tam_tel_type` objects. Because a SINGLE_TYPE tel_type can bind only one counter category, the orchagent creates one tel_type per SAI object type (`SAI_OBJECT_TYPE_PORT`, `SAI_OBJECT_TYPE_BUFFER_POOL`, `SAI_OBJECT_TYPE_QUEUE`, `SAI_OBJECT_TYPE_INGRESS_PRIORITY_GROUP`) per profile.

Reviewer: I think it's not true here. We allow multiple tel_type per profile under the single_type mode.
The key difference between single mode and mixed mode is whether multiple SAI object type can be bound to ONE tel_type object.

- In MIXED_TYPE mode the vendor SAI returns the IPFIX template through `SAI_TAM_TEL_TYPE_ATTR_IPFIX_TEMPLATES` on the single tel_type object, covering every counter category enabled via `SAI_TAM_TEL_TYPE_ATTR_SWITCH_ENABLE_*_STATS`. The buffer may contain a single IPFIX template set or - when the total exceeds the IPFIX 64KB message limit - multiple smaller template sets concatenated. CounterSyncd's template parser already handles both layouts.
- The `SAI_TAM_TEL_TYPE_ATTR_STATE` state machine operates on the single tel_type per profile; `sai_tam_tel_type_config_change_notification_fn` fires once per profile per transition into `SAI_TAM_TEL_TYPE_STATE_CREATE_CONFIG`.

Non-requirements:

- No CONFIG_DB, YANG, CLI, or STATE_DB schema changes.
- No CounterSyncd schema or public-interface changes. One internal extension to the label-resolution path is required so that the per-group sessions sharing a template_id in MIXED resolve correctly (see §7.6.1).
- No runtime mode switching - the chosen mode is fixed for the lifetime of the orchagent process.

## 6. Architecture Design

> The architecture diagram from the [base HLD §6](high-frequency-telemetry-hld.md#6-architecture-design) is unchanged. The bulk of the change is internal to `Orchagent → High frequency telemetry Orch`; the SAI/syncd boundary, the CounterSyncd public interface, the OpenTelemetry container, and the Redis databases are unaffected. CounterSyncd's internal label-resolution path is extended to handle the MIXED-mode case where multiple per-group sessions share a template_id (§7.6.1).

Reviewer: why multiple per-group sessions share a template_id ?

Author: Multiple per-group SESSION entries advertise the same template_id because in MIXED mode the orchagent creates a single tel_type per profile, queries its IPFIX template once, and then writes the same template into every HIGH_FREQUENCY_TELEMETRY_SESSION_TABLE|<profile>|<group_name> entry (PORT, QUEUE, …).

## 7. High-Level Design

### 7.1. Mode auto-detection in HFTelOrch

`HFTelOrch::isSupportedHFTel(switch_id)` is extended to query the enum capability of `SAI_TAM_TEL_TYPE_ATTR_MODE` on `SAI_OBJECT_TYPE_TAM_TEL_TYPE` using `sai_query_attribute_enum_values_capability`. The selected mode is stored on `HFTelOrch` (e.g. `sai_tam_tel_type_mode_t m_tel_type_mode`) and passed to every `HFTelProfile` constructed by the orch.

Selection rules:

| Advertised values                | Selected mode | HFT enabled |
| -------------------------------- | ------------- | ----------- |
| `SINGLE_TYPE`                    | SINGLE_TYPE   | yes         |
| `SINGLE_TYPE` and `MIXED_TYPE`   | SINGLE_TYPE   | yes         |
| `MIXED_TYPE` only                | MIXED_TYPE    | yes         |
| neither                          | -             | no (logged) |

> SINGLE_TYPE is preferred when both are advertised so that the behavior of all existing platforms is unchanged. This is consistent with the SAI specification, which declares `SAI_TAM_TEL_TYPE_MODE_SINGLE_TYPE` as the default value of `SAI_TAM_TEL_TYPE_ATTR_MODE`.

Reviewer: IMHO, MIXED_TYPE can be the default behavior in the Orchagent, since mixed_type mode is more efficient and uses fewer states and SAI objects.

Author: I have no objection to using MIXED_TYPE as default. I was just not sure there will be no issues with other vendors with changing that behavior. If you think there shouldn't be an issue with changing the behavior I will agree.

Reviewer: I think it's not an issue. I can discuss it with other vendors.

Reviewer: Could you please update the default mode to mixed_type in this document?

Reviewer 2: I would also vote for mixed_type, because it is much better. If mixed_type is not supported, we can always fallback to single type anyway.

This means the combined IPFIX template returned by the single tel_type is **replicated** into each `HIGH_FREQUENCY_TELEMETRY_SESSION|profile|group_name` entry. CounterSyncd's existing template-set parser handles both single-template and multi-template-set buffers, so no parser change is needed. The replication does require an extension to CounterSyncd's label-resolution path, since multiple per-group sessions now share a template_id; see §7.6.1.

### 7.6.1. CounterSyncd label resolution in MIXED

CounterSyncd resolves IPFIX data-record fields to SAI counter identities by looking up each field's IPFIX element ID (the per-object label assigned by `HFTelProfile`) against the `object_names` list of the STATE_DB session that owns the template. In SINGLE mode each `sai_tam_tel_type` carries its own template_id, so there is exactly one session per template_id and the lookup is unambiguous.

> In MIXED mode the orchagent replicates the combined IPFIX template into every per-group `HIGH_FREQUENCY_TELEMETRY_SESSION_TABLE` entry (§7.6), so all per-group sessions of a profile share a template_id. A resolution that consults only one session per template_id would correctly resolve labels owned by that session, but labels owned by sibling sessions (for example a PORT label seen when the QUEUE session won CounterSyncd's internal `template_id → session` race) would fall back to `unknown_<label>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In MIXED mode the orchagent replicates the combined IPFIX template into every per-group `HIGH_FREQUENCY_TELEMETRY_SESSION_TABLE` entry (§7.6), so all per-group sessions of a profile share a set of template_id. A resolution that consults only one session per template_id would correctly resolve labels owned by that session, but labels owned by sibling sessions (for example a PORT label seen when the QUEUE session won CounterSyncd's internal `template_id → session` race) would fall back to `unknown_<label>`.
```
 A session may correspond to multiple IPFIX templates.

Also, we need to support dynamic updates, so a session may temporarily have two sets of templates during the transition period. This is similar to a two-step commit: the old template ID set will be deleted only after the data plane, meaning the telemetry data, starts using the new template ID set.

Author: dynamic updates is a general countersyncd improvement, not something that supported today and is not specific to MIXED. 
The current replace behavior is unchanged by this design, I am not sure it should be part of this design

Reviewer: My comment is about two things:

1. We need to use multiple IPFIX templates instead of a single template_id, so this description must be corrected.

3. I agree that dynamic update do not need to be included in this PR. However, our design should not prevent it in the future. I’m wondering whether we should duplicate templates for each type entry, because in mixed mode, dynamic updates may require an atomic update to the template set of a session.

Reviewer: Could we emit only one combined session into State DB in mixed mode, such as HIGH_FREQUENCY_TELEMETRY_SESSION_TABLE|profile? Do you have any concerns or suggestions? I think this would make everything simpler.

Author: While there are upsides to use a combined STATE_DB profile key, but the original thought was that keeping the same STATE_DB key shape in SINGLE and MIXED keeps CounterSyncd, the inspect CLI, and any external consumers mode-agnostic — no per-read branching on m_tel_type_mode, which makes its changes simpler.

Creating the two options might also create a need to duplicate the VS tests or UT to cover both branches.

CounterSyncd handles this with a per-session `session_template_ids` set that records every template_id a session registered. At per-record lookup time it unions the `object_id_name_map` entries of all sessions sharing the record's template_id and resolves the label against that union.

> The aggregation is unambiguous because in MIXED mode the orchagent allocates labels from a per-profile monotonic counter (`HFTelProfile::m_next_label`, see §12), so two sessions within the same profile never share a label. In SINGLE mode each template_id has exactly one registering session, the aggregation collapses to that session's lookup, and behavior is identical to the pre-MIXED resolution path.

Reviewer: Could you please clarify what m_next_label is and how we should use it? I don’t fully understand it.

Author: Multiple per-group SESSION entries advertise the same template_id because in MIXED mode the orchagent creates a single tel_type per profile, queries its IPFIX template once, and then writes the same template into every HIGH_FREQUENCY_TELEMETRY_SESSION_TABLE|<profile>|<group_name> entry (PORT, QUEUE, …). The mechanism is §7.6; the resulting label-resolution wrinkle and its fix are §7.6.1.

Reviewer: Ok, Got it. Thanks.

        Note over hft_orch,syncd: Config TAM objects - one tel_type and one report for the whole profile, all SWITCH_ENABLE_* on
        hft_orch ->> syncd: create_tam_tel_type(MODE=MIXED_TYPE, all SWITCH_ENABLE_* = true)
        hft_orch ->> syncd: create_tam_report (single)
        hft_orch ->> syncd: set STATE=CREATE_CONFIG (when all object types ready)
        syncd ->> hft_orch: Config was applied in the ASIC (single tel_type)
        syncd ->> hft_orch: Query IPFIX template (combined buffer)
        loop for each object_type in profile
            hft_orch ->> state_db: Update HIGH_FREQUENCY_TELEMETRY_SESSION (group=object_type, same template replicated)
        end
    end
```

**Diagram B - full work flow with MIXED-mode annotations.**
Mirrors the base HLD §7.6 diagram end to end. Steps whose semantics differ in MIXED mode are flagged with adjacent `[MIXED]` Note blocks; everything else is identical to SINGLE mode and to the base HLD.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    autonumber
    box Redis
        participant config_db as CONFIG_DB
        participant state_db as STATE_DB
    end
    box OpenTelemetry container
        participant otel as OpenTelemetry Collector

>         participant counter as counter syncd

Reviewer: counter syncd is in the swss container, not open telemetry container.

Author: Fixed

## 9. Configuration and management

### 9.1. Manifest

N/A - HFT is a built-in feature; this enhancement does not change that.

### 9.2. CLI/YANG model Enhancements

No CLI changes. No changes to [sonic-high-frequency-telemetry.yang](sonic-high-frequency-telemetry.yang).

### 9.3. Config DB Enhancements

No changes to CONFIG_DB. The chosen mode is not user-visible - it is auto-selected from SAI capability at orchagent init.

## 10. Warmboot and Fastboot Design Impact

Warm/fast boot is not required for HFT per the base HLD §8.4. This enhancement does not change that.

## 11. Memory Consumption

In MIXED mode the orchagent holds one `sai_tam_tel_type` and one `sai_tam_report` per profile instead of up to four of each. The number of `sai_tam_counter_subscription` objects, the IPFIX template buffer size (per profile total), and CounterSyncd buffering are unchanged. The dynamic memory formula in the base HLD §8.5 still applies.

## 12. Restrictions/Limitations

Limitations introduced by this design:

- The TAM tel_type mode is chosen at orchagent init from SAI capability and cannot be changed at runtime.

> - In MIXED mode all three `SAI_TAM_TEL_TYPE_ATTR_SWITCH_ENABLE_*_STATS` flags supported by SONiC HFT (PORT, MMU, OUTPUT_QUEUE) are enabled on the single tel_type even if a given profile only references a subset of object types. The streamed counters remain constrained by `sai_tam_counter_subscription` objects.

Reviewer: What do you mean by “The streamed counters remain constrained by `sai_tam_counter_subscription` objects” ？

Author: It just means that we are setting all as true in HFTelProfile::getTAMTelTypeObjID unlike in SINGLE mode.
But this sentence is confusing, and maybe just unnecessary

- In MIXED_TYPE mode the vendor SAI returns the IPFIX template through `SAI_TAM_TEL_TYPE_ATTR_IPFIX_TEMPLATES` on the single tel_type object, covering every counter category enabled via `SAI_TAM_TEL_TYPE_ATTR_SWITCH_ENABLE_*_STATS`. The buffer may contain a single IPFIX template set or - when the total exceeds the IPFIX 64KB message limit - multiple smaller template sets concatenated. CounterSyncd's template parser already handles both layouts.
- The `SAI_TAM_TEL_TYPE_ATTR_STATE` state machine operates on the single tel_type per profile; `sai_tam_tel_type_config_change_notification_fn` fires once per profile per transition into `SAI_TAM_TEL_TYPE_STATE_CREATE_CONFIG`.

Non-requirements:

- No CONFIG_DB, YANG, CLI, or STATE_DB schema changes.
- No CounterSyncd schema or public-interface changes. One internal extension to the label-resolution path is required so that the per-group sessions sharing a template_id in MIXED resolve correctly (see §7.6.1).
- No runtime mode switching - the chosen mode is fixed for the lifetime of the orchagent process.

## 6. Architecture Design

> The architecture diagram from the [base HLD §6](high-frequency-telemetry-hld.md#6-architecture-design) is unchanged. The bulk of the change is internal to `Orchagent → High frequency telemetry Orch`; the SAI/syncd boundary, the CounterSyncd public interface, the OpenTelemetry container, and the Redis databases are unaffected. CounterSyncd's label-resolution path is extended for the MIXED case where one template is shared across per-group sessions (see §7.6.1).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The architecture diagram from the [base HLD §6](high-frequency-telemetry-hld.md#6-architecture-design) is unchanged. The bulk of the change is internal to `Orchagent → High frequency telemetry Orch`; the SAI/syncd boundary, the CounterSyncd public interface, the OpenTelemetry container, and the Redis databases are unaffected. CounterSyncd's label-resolution path is extended for the MIXED case where one set of templates is shared across per-group sessions (see §7.6.1).
```

 Same question: how about combining all per-group sessions into one profile session?
